---
layout: page
title: Innere Finsternis - Manual
description: A Roguelike Game
ads: false
permalink: /innfin/
published: false
---

NOTE: This is a detailed game manual. For _Downloads_, visit the game
website. 

*Innfin - Innere Finsternis* is a horror-themed fantasy role-playing
game set in the underworld of dungeons carved into stone and earth. It
is a roguelike game in the tradition of classics of the genre like
ADOM, Nethack, Angband and others. As you play the game, you discover
various creatures in the halls and dungeons hidden from the world
above. Your goal is to choose a deity to worship and attempt to do his
or her bidding. You can abandon your god and convert to other religion
later in the game and have the objective of the game changed, as well.

{:toc}

# The World

The game is set in the world deep in the past in which magic
reigned. Not even rudimentary civilization was yet conceived by most
races. Writing wasn't invented and songs were known but to the
cleverest of race.

In the age of Third Sailing, the brinks of the world saw tempests and
havoc that, devastating the surface, uncovered the depths that nobody
saw before. Common folk called it Inner Darkness, the realm from which
nothingness radiated. It was dreaded by all but some of the bravest
races. They believed that the Lower Dominion resembled the World Above
in many ways and was a foreboding to what was to become of the
world. Thus they called it Shadow of Tomorrow.

Little was know of the structure of the dark realm but some speculated
that it consisted of 16 layered dungeons.

## Main Dungeon

You start your adventure on the highest, level 1 of the dungeon. On
each floor you find several staircases leading to higher or lower
levels of the game. The exiting staircases on the highest (Level 1,
staircase leading upward) and lowest levels (Level 16, staircase
leading downward) serve as *Portals of Random Blackness* and *Portals
of Deathly Chasms* respectively.

## Portals and Special Dungeons

The world consists of dungeons of various levels and portals that are
accessible from them. There are many rules by which portals appear and
where they take you to. This depends on various factors, such as
character race, playing style, religion but it does *not* depend on
character level, experience or skill set, so it isn't always easy to
tell whether a particular portal will take you somewhere you are good
to survive or not. Apart from arbitrary portals, there are some that
have more important role in character development and game
progression; such portals are very few and easy to identify. You
should know when to enter them and in what order.

### Chamber of Sorrow ###

One special dungeon is accessible from one of the main dungeons
between the levels 3 - 5. It is the first thematic dungeon that you
will encounter. It is devoid of pickable items and monsters in it die
most unnatural deaths, as they do not leave you edible corpses. The
place, though, is guaranteed to train your magic and fighting skills,
as it will be much more challenging than anything you saw that early
in the game.

### Dungeons of Fate ###

Some dungeons that do not follow the pattern of increasing difficulty
typical for main 16-level dungeon stack. You know that you are in a
Dungeon of Fate when you have made some god angry or extremely
pleased. This also happens when you have done something of importance
on the large scale.

Portals and Dungeons of Fate are often the places to seek the
artifacts and creatures that are crucial for winning the game. Some
portals permanently leave you away from the main dungeon which makes
it impossible to complete the quests given by some gods, thus you
lose.

## Branches ##

When you have been in the game for long enough, you will have probably
cleared around ten levels of the main dungeon and most of special
areas. It is then time to start exploring the branches. It is the time
when you have learned enough about the world to start following
religion and choose what you want to do in it.

### Mythic Menagerie ###

### Dwarf Caverns ###

### Barbarian Temples ###

### God-King Palace ###

# Character races

## Dark Elf

Dark elves are the most mysterious of the lot. Seeing their innate
stats, it is difficult to foresee where they would thrive and where
they would perish. They can be outstanding ranged combatants with
their mastery of archery and spells singing. They are, however, hated
by many creatures and feared by yet more.

## Dwarf

Dwarves are the most typical melee fighters with high health points,
good defence and high damage. This doesn't mean that they have much
lower ability in other stats, but this advantage in melee fighting
drives them (or the player manipulating them) into further developing
this skill and therefore neglecting some other skills. This makes them
stand out in early to mid game but facing significant unforeseen
challenges in late game if overly specialized.

## Human

In many games humans are typically the most *generic* species with
stats closest to averages. In this game, however, human species are
treated specially as well, but in a slightly different sense. Humans
have the highest learning capacity and they are more flexible in what
talents they develop. This makes them *generic* in a similar sense to
other roguelikes. The difference lies in that humans are the most
prone to *corruption* and most vulnerable to *mutation*. This can be
both, helpful or hindering based on playing style, situation or
strategy.

## Huttler

Huttlers are distant relatives of humans, possessing similar
intelligence, person and susceptibility toward mutation and corruption
(and other conditions of living) but have vastly different workings in
learning and interaction with non-player characters. The difference
between them and humans becomes more evident as the game progresses.

Some say that Huttlers parallel hurthlings or hobbits in other
media. It hasn't been confirmed, however, and despite the fact that
they indeed live in holes or *huts*, they are more inclined to
barbarism and wilderness than to farming and agriculture. Neither are
they oblivious to the tidings from the larger world.

# Skills

If some areas of this game have relatively more limited choices, like
weapons, shields, clothing, the skill set and religion systems is
where abundance can be enjoyed.

# Combat

*NOTE:*_This is a general overview of the combat system. For
information on skills in various aspects of fighting and weapon usage,
see the skills section_

Winning the game isn't primarily about killing monsters and becoming
as strong as possible. Nevertheless, the dungeons present the player
with various kinds of danger. It is crucial to be able to defend
yourself as you do not always have a chance to escape. There is also
much that can be gained by visiting some places that are particularly
well-defended and only the strong fighters can venture to.

This section covers more basic forms of combat, i.e. barehanded or
weapon-based fighting. For magic spell casting and divine help, see
the _Religion_ section.

## Weapons

## Armory

# Religion

Religion is important in the game not only in providing more advanced
mechanics and diversity, but also as the most crucial area of the game
as the goal is directly determined by what god you worship. More
advanced spells also are learned by practicing religion. This becomes
even more important as the world is in its early days and magic-less
races haven't yet learned enough technology, and but the crudest and
simplest weapons are easily available.

## Gods

### Aronkhar

Aronkhar is the god of tribal warfare and barbarism. Until the most
recent ages, his grip on the world was undisputed. It favors bravery
and honor, and his reign over the world is remembered as The Golden
Age of Heroes where the honourable thrived.

The untainted domain of Aronkhar has known little of darkness and
corruption that is brewing in the farthest rims of the world and fast
approaching with advancing civilization. His calls for his faithful
warriors is at its strongest, defending the integrity of the blissful
world.

### Marmrhak

### Sazanas

Even in its merriest days, the world remembered of the shadows told by
Lost Generations, when Sazanas first tried to bring domestication,
servitude and contempt.

Sazanas is said to be generous in granting brilliance and knowledge of
different machinery to his followers. His first coming showed the
world primitive form of town settlements that were centered around
High Temples. Such areas indulged inhabitants with powers unheard of
in the older, Aronkhar domain.

### Thiorharl

## Magic

Most of the magic spells are learned by divine help (Divine Magic),
save for some more basic forms of magic which require nothing but a
wand (Arcane Magic). A wand, indeed, is the basis of all spell
casting, be it divine calling or arcane magic.. There aren't wands of
many different kind, they uniformly differ by size - which determines
spells of what order they can cast. Casting difficult spells with
mediocre wands can either succeed, break the wand or even miscast,
which can be dangerous with certain spells.

You don't do magic by reading scrolls. You *remember* spells and there
is a limit to how many of them you can remember. Certain conditions
affect your memory. Every time you grow agony, you forget a random
spell (some spells are exception to this).

# Monsters

Unlike many other roguelikes where most monsters are immediately your
enemies, in this game your playing style determines what other
characters see you as. There are, however, some monsters that are
inherently aggressive toward your race or to anything at all. Such
monsters are often *cursed*. 

## Wizards

Wizards possess similar abilities as the player in that that they can
use magic, weapons and have advanced tactics in wars. They are often
in the most important parts of the world.

## Specials

Specials are non-natives of the dungeons. They have *entered* the
dungeons just like you have. Like wizards, they are users of
magic. Specials have more personality to them, like names, stories or
quests. They are often of very intelligent races.

## Orcs

## Goblins

## Trolls

## Dragons

## Animals

### Intelligent animals

Some animals possess rudimentary form of intelligence that makes
extremely powerful if combined with their immense bodies and wild
temper.

### Cursed animals

Cursed animals serve some fell purpose in the game. Typically they are
cursed to serve some other monsters or gods. To a player, this means
that such an animal can pose significantly more threat than
others. Not all animals can easily be identified as cursed.

# Conditions affecting living

## Food

In the underworld hunger, lack of light and sanity is another instance
of immediate danger you have to cope with. You can escape or avoid
most monsters, but you can't escape hunger. Though scarce and
deficient, the dungeons offer you some stores of it if you look in
right places. You will often be facing hunger and the stores you can
carry with yourself are limited, so you can only survive if you learn
that the world you are in is vastly different from the one you come
from, you will eventually learn that the luck lies in how fast you
learn what you can eat and how often you should do it.


## Health

## Corruption

If fell monsters of the dungeons want to take your flesh, the dungeon
itself wants to take your soul. Your sanity is as vulnerable to
darkness and terror of the underworld as your skin is to the claws of
fiercest animals.

Some aspects of your character are monitored, like remaining health
points, items it is wearing or whether it is hungry. Level of
corruption, though, affects your play in ways you cannot easily check.

## Confusion

## Blindness

Any character can be affected by blindness. None are exempt. When a
player character becomes blind, the field of vision becomes a gray
cloud of nothingness in which no monster, door or item can be
seen. Blindness can be temporary that heals itself in several turns or
semi-permanent, when it lasts until you sing a Bard's Song, drink
*potion of seeing*, invoke a spell or drink a potion that cures
blindness or ask your god.

## Agony

Agony affects characters of different race differently. Your skills,
level, items are all irrelevant. What your character does in agony
depends solely on its race. Agony cannot be cured immediately by
drinking a potion, singing a song or invoking a spell. It doesn't cure
at all sometimes but its effects become less strong when other states
increase or decrease, such as corruption or mutation. Typically, there
is nothing that effectively reduced agony. But you can definitely grow
your agony by any of the following (depending on your race) - resting,
mass killing other monsters, invoking actions that harm you,
excessively drinking potions (not waiting a single turn between
drinking potions).

## Deafness

When you are deaf, you stop sensing danger when attempting to open
doors or initiating combat with a monster that has its allies
nearby. You rarely become deaf but it can be very dangerous if it
happens in a critical situation.

## Mutation

# Pickable Items

The game offers several kinds of items that can be found in different
parts of the dungeon and other areas. The most basic items are food,
weapons, clothes, shields/armor, jewelry, wands and some thematic
artifacts. 

# Developer's Guide

## Source code structure

### *actor.h*

This header file contains all the functions related to the actors,
including NPC and items (potions, scrolls, books, etc). All of this is
implemented as a single actor structure (struct actor) which contains
pointers to various helper structures, such as \`pickable\` (an item
that can be picked and used, \`destructible\` (an actor that can be
harmed when attacked, \`attacker\`, (an actor that can
attack. Intelligently or with random motives). There is also an
important \`ai\` helper structure, which, if the actor possesses it,
gives the wearer the ability to have intelligence, perhaps even
increasing one, such as capacity for learning. 

# License
