---
layout: post
title: Training as Testing
category: "Simpler"
---

There is some worship of training, of improvement and living in strict
discipline. Many systems of training from present and past are
legendary for their rigorousness. One such example is Spartan
*Agoge*. It is rare that somebody argues about effectiveness of such
regimes. However, it is rarely pointed out that not all of the
exertions in such systems are directed toward improvement. A lot of it
is just about filtering people out. Giving challenges to the group
that only the strongest, most fit can complete successfully -
sometimes these challenges are long enough to appear like they are
some form of training, but in the end, they might be more aimed at
testing their ability to maintain themselves on long-term goals.

A modern equivalent of this is some introductory university courses
that are given to programming students that are not only inappropriate
for beginners, but also present challenges that aren't primarily
useful for learning. One can find many university programs that choose
to teach C or C++ as the first programming languages. Does this choice
help the learning process for the students? Or maybe it just filters
some of the students out.

To expand more on this, compare, which would be a more useful tool for
learning to program, C++ which has several dozens of features directed
to large teams of professionals but do little but confuse a novice
programmer, or Scheme or Python that have much less overhead in terms
of syntax and one can start composing small programs right away?
